           sustainability

Article
Effects of Packaging and Food Waste Prevention by
Consumers on the Environmental Impact of
Production and Consumption of Bread in Norway
Erik Svanes 1, * , Sofie Oestergaard 2,3              and Ole Joergen Hanssen 1
 1    Ostfold Research, NO-1671 Kråkerøy, Norway; ojh@ostfoldforskning.no
 2    Cernova AS/Norgesmøllene AS, 5817 Bergen, Norway; sofie.ostergaard@norgesmollene.no
 3    Department of Design and Architecture, NTNU Norwegian University of Science and Technology,
      7491 Trondheim, Norway
 *    Correspondence: erik@ostfoldforskning.no; Tel.: +47-970-160-51
                                                                                                        
 Received: 22 October 2018; Accepted: 18 December 2018; Published: 21 December 2018                     


 Abstract: Bread is a staple food in Norway, with a yearly per capita consumption of 52 kg. It is
 an important source of energy, dietary fibre and protein as well as certain minerals and vitamins.
 Previous studies have shown that bread has a relatively low environmental impact compared with
 other foods. Food waste studies, however, have shown that bread and other baked goods have
 a high wastage rate in Norway. On the basis of lower Norwegian wheat yields, it is therefore
 expected that the environmental impact of bread could be higher than in other European countries.
 The purpose of this study was to assess the environmental impact of bread from cradle to grave,
 identify environmental hotspots, examine the role of packaging in bread waste and identify possible
 remediation measures with a particular focus on the post-farm value chain. The results showed
 that for every kilogram of bread consumed, the global warming potential was 0.99 kg CO2 -eq,
 the eutrophication potential was 7.2 g PO4 -eq, the acidification potential was 8.4 g SO2 -eq and the
 cumulative energy demand was 18 MJ. The principal uncertainty within the calculation was the use
 of database data for the 21 ingredients. For example, the effect of soil mineralisation, which could
 give significant CO2 and N2 O emissions, was not included because figures have only been quantified
 for a few ingredients and there is no international agreement on the methodology. The primary
 hotspot was the production of the ingredients, principally at the agricultural stage, while bread waste
 took the second place. The highest potential for the reduction of post-farm environmental impact lies
 in reducing product wastage at the retail and consumer stages. Consumers already employ strategies
 to reduce wastage, such as using extra packaging and freezing and toasting bread. This study shows
 that other consumer packaging solutions can keep the bread fresh for longer, thus reducing wastage
 and the need for the abovementioned consumer strategies. Nevertheless, other researches in this
 subject have shown that consumer preferences and behaviours play a significant role in the creation
 of bread waste, and this should therefore be taken into account when planning reduction measures.

 Keywords: bread; LCA; food waste; packaging; consumer habits; Norway




1. Introduction
     The environmental impact of food from farm to fork constitutes a major proportion of the overall
environmental impacts in the world. One study [1] found that 20–30% of total greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions and 59% of total eutrophication impacts come from food value chains. Another study [2]
found that 26% of primary energy (in 2013) was consumed by the food value chain. Substantial
quantities of water and land area are also used.


Sustainability 2019, 11, 43; doi:10.3390/su11010043                          www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                      2 of 20



     Bread is a staple food that plays an important role in the Norwegian diet. The consumption
of bread in Norway is 52 kg per person per year, which equates to a total of about 275,372 tonnes
a year [3–5]. This is a relatively high volume when compared with other commensurate countries,
although it must be noted that the World Health Organisation recommends an annual intake of
90 kg per person. The Norwegian Government [6] recommends a daily intake of 70–90 g of whole
grains, but only 1 in 4 people in Norway eat enough of it. Intake of wholegrain bread, together with
oatmeal or wholegrain cereals, is an important source of fibre, vitamins (thiamine, folate, vitamin E),
minerals (iron and selenium), energy and protein [7]. On the basis of consumer statistics [4] and
nutritional values [7], the authors calculated that 23.5% of the Norwegian per capita protein intake is
derived from cereals.
     Bread consumption in Norway differs from other countries in that more whole grains are used as
ingredients for bread. Consumers prefer very fresh bread with a crispy crust and a soft core, which is
not easy to maintain for any length of time at home. On average, 78% of the wheat grain is utilised in
food, significantly more than in many other countries [8].
     Bread is also a relatively expensive food in Norway in comparison with other European countries.
However, several studies have found that bread and other bakery goods have a high degree of wastage
in Norway compared with other food categories. This wastage occurs in bakeries, at the retail stage
and among consumers. The bread waste rate is estimated to be 22 kg edible bread per capita per year;
only fruits and vegetables and leftovers from cooked main meals account for more waste than bread in
Norway [9].
     The aim of this study was to investigate the environmental impact of bread from cradle to grave
in order to establish the environmental hotspots; to examine the role of food waste, packaging and
consumer behaviour; and to identify potential measures to reduce this wastage. The focus is on the
post-farm life cycle stages.

2. Background of the Study

2.1. The Environmental Impact of Bread
     The environmental impact of bread has been analysed and documented in a number of life cycle
assessment (LCA) studies. Although bread is a comparatively simple food item consisting of cereals,
water and some minor ingredients, the results have been quite different. Kulak et al. [10] studied the
value chain from cradle to consumers and found that the global warming potential (GHG emissions)
was 0.8–2.3 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread. A European study of national bread types in 21 countries [11]
found an even greater variation, with GHG emissions ranging from 0.5 to 6.6 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread
from cradle to retail. Another study [12] looked at bread produced and consumed in the UK but with
wheat from varying sources as well as different types of flour and packaging. The study found that
the GHG emissions results ranged from 0.98 to 1.24 kg CO2 -eq/loaf of bread, corresponding to 1.2 to
1.6 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread.
     Few LCA studies of bread have been carried out within the Nordic region in recent years,
although there have been two. One of these, a study in Norway [13], found GHG emissions to be
0.937 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread from cradle to consumer. The other, a Danish study [14] of rye bread,
showed a result of 0.73 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread from cradle to consumer.
     The primary hotspots in most studies have been agricultural production [10–14], baking [11,14],
refrigerated storage and toasting [12], product wastage [12] and emissions from electricity generation
in the national grid mix [11].
     Kulak et al. [10] found different hotspots for the various indicators, production methods and
countries of origin. However, in the French reference system, which is most comparable to the
most common technology in Norway, the following results were obtained: For non-renewable
energy use, retail and transport were the most significant; for GHG emissions, agriculture and
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                        3 of 20



transport had the most importance; and for both acidification and eutrophication, agriculture had the
greatest significance.

2.2. Food Waste and Packaging
      The quantity of bakery goods [9] wasted in Norway is high at 110,000 tonnes per year. Of this
amount, 64,000 tonnes are wasted in households. Bread waste is calculated at 22 kg per capita per year,
of which 13 kg is wasted within households, 5 kg in bakeries and 4 kg in retail. The economic and
environmental costs of this waste are also high. On the basis of one study [15], the cost is 147 Euro per
capita per year, and the GHG emission is 13.2 kg CO2 -eq.
      Packaging has a protective function. Several studies [15,16] have shown that the environmental
impact of packaging is relatively low in comparison with the impact of the bread itself. Hanssen et
al. [17] also showed that the life cycle cost is much lower. Despite this fact, 86% of consumers answered
in a survey [18] that it was worse to discard the packaging than the bread it contained.
      Life cycle assessments have clearly indicated that food waste prevention is an important strategy
when looking for ways to reduce the environmental impact of bread [19]. They have also shown
that the optimisation of packaging should be considered as a particularly important measure when
attempting to achieve such reductions.
      The most common packaging for freshly baked bread in Norway is either a bag made of 50%
perforated polyethylene (PE) and 50% plain paper (about 12.5 g in total) or a bag made solely of paper
(about 10 g). These packaging solutions do little to preserve the freshness of the bread, which in turn
leads to food wastage [17].

2.3. The Role of the Consumer in Food Wastage
      Several studies have investigated the reasons for consumer food wastage. Various drivers for
wasting food, such as portioning, abundance, attitude, knowledge, lifestyle, storing and packaging,
were identified by Thyberg et al. and Hebrok et al. [20,21]. Previous studies have shown that young
people waste more food than older people and that income, education and gender influence the
amount of food being wasted. Examples of this are given by Quested et al. [22].
      One recent consumer survey [15] in Norway showed that consumers’ low tolerance for bread that
is not completely fresh is, at least in Norway, an important reason for wasting bread. The packaging
seems to play an important role: 97% of consumers reported changing the primary packaging of the
bread, with a majority of them replacing the original packaging with a plastic bag or using both the
bag and the original packaging at the same time. Consumers also stated that the amount of bread in
the packaging is an important factor. The survey found that, for many households, the standard size
of a loaf (750 g) was too large. Incorrect storage at home was another reason given by many.
      The survey (ibid) revealed that consumer behaviour can show notable variations. It identified two
groups of consumers: the high wasters (HW) and the low wasters (LW). HW are over-represented in
the 26–59 age group, in households with children, among full-time employees and among people with
a high income. For HW, it is important that the packaging is open in the store so that they can smell the
bread. They prefer fresh bread (as opposed to vacuum-packed), and they buy bread often and many
loaves at a time. LW have a stronger tendency to preserve the bread by freezing and toasting, and they
are more concerned about the environmental impacts, such as the recyclability of the packaging.
      Consumers use different strategies for preserving the bread for longer in order to reduce wastage.
Freezing [12,15,16,21] and toasting [12,15] are the most common methods but, according to the survey,
changing the packaging is also common.
      Consumer habits can also have indirect impacts on bread waste in other life cycle stages.
According to sources in the retail sector, it is well known that consumers expect to find their favourite
bread at any time of day in the shop, even just before closing time. This means that retailers have to
overstock in order to be able to meet consumer expectations.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                           4 of 20



      Consumer habits can, on the other hand, play a positive indirect role. This is exemplified by their
preference for fibre-rich, “brown” bread that uses more whole grains than white bread, where the bran
is removed. This results in more grains being used, on average 78% of wheat, for human consumption
than in other European countries. In general, the part of cereals not used for human consumption
sells at a lower price than that used for human consumption. Applying economic allocation, as in this
study, the environmental impact of the cereals used in bread should, on average, be lower in Norway
than in countries where white bread is more prevalent.

3. Methods

3.1. General
     The principal method employed in this study was life cycle assessment based on ISO 14040-44 [23–25].
LCA is known as a methodology for estimating the environmental impact of a product or a service
throughout the value chain from raw material extraction to production, use and waste treatment.
     The impact assessment method used for most impact categories was CML-IA baseline V3.05.
For cumulative energy demand, Cumulative Energy Demand V1.10 by Ecoinvent was used. There is
no internationally agreed method for adapting the LCA method specifically to cereal products,
which makes comparisons between studies difficult. For example, in many cases, different life cycle
impact assessment (LCIA) methods are used. For this reason, we decided to include results using
the ILCD method (Midpoint 2011, version 1.10) and the ReCiPe method (2016 Midpoint (H), version
1.02) in addition to CML so that the results from this study would be more commensurate with those
of other studies. The following environmental impact categories were included in this study: global
warming potential, acidification potential, eutrophication potential, photochemical oxidation potential,
ozone creation potential and cumulative primary energy demand. The SimaPro 8.5.2.0 software was
used together with the Ecoinvent 3.5 database and Agri-Footprint 4.0 in carrying out the analyses.

3.2. Goal, Scope and Research Questions
     The purpose of this study was to determine the predominant environmental and resource hotspots
in the bread value chain, to analyse the impacts of different consumer behaviour with regard to food
waste, to document the effects of various measures to improve the packaging of fresh bread and the
systems for its distribution and to examine the efficacy of food wastage reduction measures.
     The research questions in the study were as follows:

a.      What are the primary hotspots in the bread system for the different environmental impact
        categories, and how do the findings from this study compare with results from other studies?
b.      What is the relative importance of packaging and food waste along the bread value chain from
        an environmental perspective?
c.      What are the environmental impacts of processes that can extend the life of fresh bread
        (for example, freezing and toasting), specifically with regard to possible reductions in food waste?
d.      How can the environmental impacts of the system be reduced through measures targeting bread
        packaging or other aspects of the life cycle of bread?

3.2.1. Functional Unit
    The functional unit was defined as follows: 1 kg of bread produced, distributed and consumed
in Norway.

3.2.2. System Boundaries and Cut-off
     The system that was studied included the production of raw materials (wheat, barley, rye,
sunflower seeds, sesame seeds, grain, salt, etc.), milling and other processing of raw materials into
ingredients (wheat flour, barley flour, rye flour, yeast) and the transport of raw materials before baking.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                         5 of 20



On-farm infrastructure was only included as a specific amount of concrete and did not cover machines
and only partially covered buildings. The impact of soil organic carbon (SOC) loss was not included.
The reason for employing the database for the agricultural phase, for not including SOC loss and
for only partially covering infrastructure was the lack of harmonised data regarding the 21 different
ingredients in the bread.
      At the bakery stage, bread baking, cooling and packing were included. Packaging included
consumer packaging, distribution packaging (boxes) and transport packaging (trolleys) as well as
the extra plastic bags that many, but not all, consumers use as additional wrapping, either in shops
after slicing the bread or at home. After the bakery stage, processes and materials that were included
were transport to retail, retail, transport to consumer, end consumption and handling of bread and
packaging waste from bakery, retail and consumer. The impact of the treatment of waste packaging
and bread waste was included as was the benefits from such treatment.
      The geographical boundary was limited to Norway. However, the completeness of data was
deemed as being high because a high percentage of bread within the Norwegian market was covered.
The bread that was used as a study object for analysis is one of the best-selling products in the
Norwegian market, the bakery data came from one of Norway’s largest bakery companies and data
relating to retail came from one of the biggest retail companies in Norway.
      The environmental impacts of capital goods, such as machinery and buildings relating to the
bakery, retail and home consumption, were excluded because bread is a high-volume product and as
such is expected to contribute little to overall environmental impacts.

3.2.3. Allocation
      The principal multiple output processes in this study were (a) milling of cereals, yielding fine
flour, wholemeal flour and bran; (b) transport of bread to retail; (c) retail; and (d) consumer transport.
      In the milling process, economic allocation was employed because the price determines, to a large
extent, which products are made. In cases (b) and (d), mass allocation was applied. In (b), it can
be argued that most of the bakery goods have approximately the same density and thus occupy the
same space in lorries, so mass allocation should therefore be used. In (d), the reason for applying
mass allocation was that the data did not allow for a differentiation between different food products.
In case (c), an economic allocation factor was employed because data on retail impacts was given per
monetary unit turnover.
      Bread waste gives rise to both direct and indirect environmental impacts. The direct impacts
arise from transporting wasted bread to waste treatment plants and from the waste treatment itself.
The indirect impacts come from the production of bread to replace the wasted bread. In this study,
both indirect and direct impacts of bread waste were calculated separately. They were allocated to
the life cycle stage in which the waste occurs and not to the life cycle stage where the emissions occur.
The reason for this was to illustrate the environmental impacts of bread waste.
      Bread waste from bakery and retail is used as animal feed. Therefore, the benefit of this usage
was defined as an avoided impact for the bread system, where the bread was estimated to replace
an equivalent amount of cereals in the bread.

3.2.4. Waste Treatment
      The following processes regarding bread and packaging waste were included: transport of waste
to treatment plant, waste treatment and the benefits of waste treatment. The benefits of waste treatment
were included by system expansion through the substitution (avoided impact) method. This means
that for bread, for example, a benefit of an equivalent amount of the bread ingredients was assumed
but was restricted to the cereals.
      Consumer bread and packaging waste were assumed to be treated as average Norwegian
household wet organic, paper and plastic waste.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                      6 of 20



4. Materials: Life Cycle Inventory

4.1. Data Gathering and Sources
      Calculations relating to the impact of the milling of cereals, transport of raw materials to
processing, processing of most of the raw materials into ingredients, transport of ingredients to
the bakery, baking of products, packaging, transport to retail, amounts of bread waste, handling of
bakery and retail bread waste and data relating to consumer behaviour were based on site-specific or
primary data. Calculations regarding the impact of the cultivation of cereals and other ingredients,
processing of some raw materials into ingredients, retail impacts and consumer transport were based
on general database data.
      Data concerning the origin of wheat, on milling, transport of wheat and packaging was supplied
by the milling company. Data relating to bread (recipe, weight), packaging, baking process and
transport to retail came from the baking company. Information regarding consumer behaviour in
relation to shopping, storing, processing and wasting of bread was based on data from a consumer
survey [15]. Information on consumer transport was taken from Pretty et al. [26]. Data pertaining to
the processing of bread waste into pig feed was obtained from the processing company.
      In Table A2 (Appendix B), a list of the most important database processes used in this study
is given.

4.2. Composition of Bread
     The total mass of the bread itself was 736 grams. Data on the composition of the bread is given in
Table 1. The bread is one of the leading market products in Norway. The data in Table 1 refers to bread
after baking. The amount of water in the dough was higher than the amount shown in the table.

                                           Table 1. Composition of bread.

                              Ingredient                        Amount (%)      Origin
                                Water                                25         Norway
                                                                              Norway and
                      Wheat and wheat by-products                    56
                                                                                Poland
                                   Rye                              7.6         Norway
                                 Barley                             1.2         Norway
                             Salt and yeast                         3.3        Unknown
             Seeds (linseed, sunflower seed, sesame seed)           3.0        Unknown
                           Other ingredients                        3.5        Unknown


4.3. Cultivation and Transport of Raw Materials
     The proportion of wheat coming from Norway varies greatly from year to year depending on
the weather and other external factors. However, information from the milling company shows that
over a period of several years, an average of 65% of the wheat has been coming from Norway and the
remaining 35% from Poland.
     Data on the cultivation of raw materials was obtained from the databases Agri-Footprint 4.0 and
Ecoinvent 3.5.

4.4. Processing
     The predominant ingredients in bread are cereals. The cereals are dried, stored and processed
into flour or other ingredients. Most of the cereals contained in the product in this study came from
dry milling. Some minor cereal ingredients came from wet processing. Drying of cereals was expected
to take place in the country where the cereals were grown. Data from the database Agri-Footprint v 4.0
and Ecoinvent 3 was used in the calculations. Data regarding the transport of raw materials to the mill
and energy consumption at the mill was provided by the milling company (see Table 2). Transport of
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                                   7 of 20



other ingredients was not included because the exact geographical origin of these ingredients was
not known.

                                                    Table 2. Processing data.

               Process/Item                                             Data                                    Data Source
                                                Norwegian wheat, barley and rye: 500 km road
       Transport producer to mill                  transport. Imported wheat: 350 km road
                                                                                                               Mill company
                                                transport and 723 nautical miles sea transport.
        Mill energy consumption                 129 kWh electricity per ton of flour produced.


      Data for economic allocation of mill products and allocation factors are shown in Table 3.

                              Table 3. Data for allocation of wheat and rye products in flour mill.

                   Material                         Material Balance and Allocation Factors                    Data Source
      Wheat flour products (% w/w)             67.1% refined flour, 13.8% whole flour, 19.1% bran.
     Wheat, economic allocation factors        Refined flour 78.5%, whole flour 14.2%, bran 7.3%.        Primary data from
       Rye flour products (% w/w)              16.5% refined flour, 72.6% whole flour, 10.9% bran          mill company
     Rye, economic allocation factors          Refined flour 16.8%, whole flour 78.8%, bran 4.4%.


    Some of the products used in the bread came from wet processing of cereals. The baking company
had no information on the origin of these cereals.

4.5. Packaging
      Data for the packaging system is given in Table 4. The packaging system consists of consumer
packaging, which is used only once, and distribution packaging plus transport packaging, which are
reused many times. In addition, most consumers use an extra bread pouch (see Table 6). This pouch
can be had for free in the shops where the bread is bought and is normally used when consumers
are cutting the bread in machines available in the shops; it is for this pouch that data was gathered.
Some consumers use another plastic pouch for the bread; no data were available for these pouches,
but the packaging material and weight is not expected to deviate significantly from the pouch given
for free in shops.

                                                  Table 4. Data on packaging.

                   Packaging Element                                           Materials                          Data Source
                  Consumer packaging                                   1.9 g, PET (*), 14.4 g paper
                                                                                                                     Baking
                                                              4 kg box, HDPE (**), containing 12 loaves,
                 Distribution packaging                                                                             company
                                                                       estimated lifespan 6 years.
                                                            2.5 kg trolley, HDPE (**), containing 60 loaves,
                   Transport packaging
                                                                     estimated lifespan of 10 years.
    Proportion of consumers using extra packaging                                  91%                                [15]
                                   (*) Polyethylene terephthalate. (**) High density polyethylene.


    Data on production and retail bread waste was gathered directly from the baking company.
The wastage along the value chain of bread is shown in Table 4.

4.6. Bread Production
    Data on bread production and transport to retail is shown in Table 5. This is primary data gathered
from the involved companies.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                          8 of 20



                               Table 5. Data on bread production and transport to retail.

                   Process                                        Data                                      Source
       Transport from mill to baker                   438 km on >32 tonne truck                       Mill company
        Baker energy consumption       0.297 kWh electricity and 0.115 kWh natural gas per bread     Baking company


4.7. Retail
      Transport of fresh bread to retail in Norway is generally direct from bakery to retail without
going through wholesale. The transport is usually carried out by the baking company, as in this case.
The average driving distance for Norway is 0.5 km per loaf of bread. The bread is transported in small
lorries, and the same vehicle that transports the bread to retail transports unsold bread back from retail
to the bakery.

4.8. Consumer
    The data that formed the basis of the calculation of consumer impacts are summarised in Table 6.
The data is mostly secondary data except for the extra packaging.

                                      Table 6. Data related to consumer impacts.

                Process                                 Data                                       Source
                                      0.185 km by car and 0.0085 km by bus per
         Consumer transport                                                                          [26]
                                                kg product bought.
   Extra packaging used by some
                                                      3.55 g PE                             Packaging producer
            consumers
                                       0.11 kWh/kg of bread, 417 kJ per kg of
 Reducing temperature from room
                                      water. It is assumed that the same amount                Physical tables.
  temperature to below freezing
                                              of energy is used for bread.
                                                                                     Process “Freezer, big, B” in the LCA
                                       Energy consumption of 4.2 Wh per litre
  Freeze storage of bread (keeping                                                            Foods DK database.
                                      per day. It is assumed that a loaf of bread
        bread at –18 deg C)                                                         Space requirement: Own measurement.
                                      occupies 2 L and is stored for two weeks.
                                                                                            Time: own assumption.
                                      0.047 kWh/slice bread; 25 slices per kg of
           Toasting of bread                                                                         [12]
                                                 bread assumed.


4.9. Bread Waste
   Bread and other bakery goods have some of the highest wastage rates among food products in
Norway. Table 7 shows the amount of bread wasted in production, retail and in consumers’ homes.

                                 Table 7. Data on bread waste along the value chain.

                                Amount Wasted as % of
                                                                                    Source of Data
                               Bread Entering the System
         Bakery waste                      3.3                                   Baking company
         Retail waste                      11.4                                  Baking company
                                                                  Calculated from consumption data in Reference
      Consumer waste                       8.2
                                                                       [3] and wastage data in Reference [9].


4.10. Waste Management
     The principal waste produced in the bread life cycle is bread waste and packaging. Table 6
contains data employed in the calculations relating to bread waste. Table 8 contains information used
to calculate the environmental impacts of bread waste.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                       9 of 20



                                         Table 8. Data on waste management.

                Process                                      Data                                      Source
    Bakery and retail bread waste    Used as feed for pigs.                                    Baking company
                                     Energy required: 0.00397 kWh electricity and 0.70 MJ
                                     natural gas.
                                     Transport distances (road): 100 km from shop to
      Pig feed production from                                                                  Feed processing
                                     processing plant and 60 km from processing plant to
             bread waste                                                                           company
                                     pig farmer.
                                     10% product loss in the process, assuming avoided
                                     impact based on cereal content of bread.
                                     Average waste treatment for Norwegian household
                                     waste: food: 5.0% landfill, 49% incineration, 21%
                                     composting, 25% biogas; plastic: 7.2% landfill, 67%
        Consumer bread and                                                                              [27]
                                     incineration, 25.8% material recycling; paper: 0%
         packaging waste                                                                                [28]
                                     landfill, 4.4% incineration, 95.6% material recycling.
                                     Transport distances and other data for calculating
                                     waste treatment impacts is given by Raadal et al.


4.11. Division into Life Cycle Stages
     For the purposes of gaining a clearer picture of the results, the processes were divided into life
cycle stages.

-      Ingredients: Agricultural production (including production of inputs and handling of all outputs),
       drying, processing and transport of ingredients used in bread.
-      Bakery: Impacts of baking process, indirect and direct impacts of bread waste.
-      Packaging: Production of consumer, distribution and transport packaging and the raw materials
       for the packaging; waste treatment of consumer packaging.
-      Transport: Transport of ingredients to the bakery and of finished bread to retail.
-      Retail: Energy consumption in retail.
-      Consumer: Transport of bread from retail to consumer, freezing and toasting, indirect and direct
       impacts of consumer bread waste, extra packaging used by consumers and waste treatment of
       consumer packaging.

5. Results

5.1. Total Life Cycle Impacts
     The total life cycle impacts using the CML method are shown in Table 9. Results calculated
using the other LCIA methods (ReCiPe 2016 Midpoint Hierarchist and ILCD Midpoint) are shown in
Table A1 (Appendix A).

                                    Table 9. Impact of bread from cradle to grave.

                       Impact Category                           Unit                         Result
                Global warming potential                      kg·CO2-eq                        0.99
            Photochemical oxidation potential                 g·C2 H4 -eq                     0.20
                  Acidification potential                      g·SO2 -eq                       8.41
                 Eutrophication potential                      g·PO4 -eq                       7.2
           Abiotic Depletion Potential, elements                g·Sb-eq                       0.002
            Abiotic Depletion Potential. fossil                MJ·LHV                         10,1
                        Water use                                 m3                            4,2
               Cumulative energy demand                           MJ                           18,0
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                           10 of 20



5.2. Hotspots
      The contribution to the total impacts made by the varying stages in the food chain, exemplified by
the GHG emissions, is shown in Figures 1–3. Figure 1 shows the distribution of impacts for individual
processes and materials across the value chain. As can be seen, the greatest life cycle GHG emission
came from the production of bread ingredients, chiefly from the cultivation of wheat. Consumer
and retail bread waste were other important contributing factors, although bread waste from retail is
utilised as pig
  Sustainability   feed
                 2018, 10, and
                           x FORthus
                                 PEERreplaces
                                      REVIEW other feed.                                       10 of 20
   Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                              10 of 20




                 Figure 1. Distribution of GHG emissions across the value chain from cradle to grave.
                  Figure1.1.Distribution
                Figure       Distributionof
                                          ofGHG
                                            GHG emissions acrossthe
                                                emissions across thevalue
                                                                     valuechain
                                                                           chainfrom
                                                                                  fromcradle
                                                                                        cradle
                                                                                             toto grave.
                                                                                                grave.




                  Figure
                   Figure 2. Cumulativeenergy
                          2. Cumulative energy  demand
                                              demand    across
                                                     across     the value
                                                            the value chainchain from cradle
                                                                            from cradle        to grave.
                                                                                        to grave.

     ConsumerFigure
               packaging,  bakingenergy
                     2. Cumulative and consumer  transport
                                        demand across        were
                                                      the value    other
                                                                chain frommajor
                                                                           cradlecontributors.
                                                                                 to grave.
     Figures 2–4 show the distribution of other impacts from cradle to grave for bread. In all cases,
the production of ingredients gave the highest impact, but the distribution of other impacts varied.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                      11 of 20
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                       11 of 20
Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                       11 of 20




                  Figure
                  Figure 3. Eutrophication impacts across the value chain from cradle to grave.
                  Figure 3. Eutrophication impacts across the value chain from cradle to grave.
                         3.




                     Distribution of acidification impacts across the value chain from cradle to grave.
           Figure 4. Distribution
           Figure 4. Distribution of acidification impacts across the value chain from cradle to grave.
     Figure 2
     Figure   2 shows
                 shows that
                          that while
                                while the
                                        the ingredient
                                              ingredient stage
                                                           stage had
                                                                  had the
                                                                        the highest
                                                                            highest impact
                                                                                     impact and
                                                                                              and bread
                                                                                                    bread waste
                                                                                                             waste was
                                                                                                                     was
      Figurefor
important     2 shows     that while
                  cumulative      energythedemand,
                                              ingredientthestage  hadstage
                                                              baking    the highest
                                                                              and    impact and
                                                                                   consumer          bread waste
                                                                                                packaging            was
                                                                                                               alsohad
                                                                                                                     had
important for cumulative energy demand, the baking stage and consumer packaging also                                    a
important    for
a relativelyhigh  cumulative
              highsignificance   energy
                     significanceforforGHG  demand,
                                        GHGemissions.  the
                                                emissions.   baking   stage  and consumer     packaging      also  had  a
relatively
relatively
     Figureshigh
               3   significance for    GHGthe  emissions.
     Figures   3 and
                  and 44 show
                           show that
                                   that in
                                         in the case
                                                  case of
                                                       of eutrophication
                                                            eutrophication andand acidification,
                                                                                  acidification, the
                                                                                                  the production
                                                                                                        production of  of
      Figures   3  and  4  show    that  in  the  case  ofcontribution
                                                            eutrophication    and acidification,   the production      of
ingredients dominated completely and that the contribution made by the waste by
ingredients   dominated     completely     and  that the                 made  by the waste   of bread    of consumers
                                                                                                              bread by
ingredients
was            dominated
     also noteworthy.         completely       and  that   the  contribution    made   by  the   waste     of bread    by
consumers    was also noteworthy.
consumers     was alsothenoteworthy.
     Figure 55shows
     Figure       shows the  distribution
                                distributionof GHG    emissions
                                                 of GHG           at a more
                                                             emissions    at aggregate  level. Again,
                                                                             a more aggregate           the Again,
                                                                                                    level.   production
                                                                                                                      the
      Figure 5 shows the distribution of GHG emissions at a more aggregate level. Again, the
of ingredients   dominated,     but  the  consumer    stage   was the  second  greatest  contributing
production of ingredients dominated, but the consumer stage was the second greatest contributing         factor to GHG
production of ingredients dominated, but the consumer stage was the second greatest contributing
factor to GHG emissions. For the production of ingredients, data on product wastage was not known,
factor to GHG emissions. For the production of ingredients, data on product wastage was not known,
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                        12 of 20

Sustainability 2018, 10, x FOR PEER REVIEW                                                                         12 of 20

emissions. For the production of ingredients, data on product wastage was not known, hence no data
hence
is      noFor
   given.    data
                theisdistribution
                      given. For stage,
                                    the distribution
                                           the wastagestage,  the wastage
                                                        was negligible.      was negligible.
                                                                          Packaging               Packaging
                                                                                        in this signifies      in this
                                                                                                          the impact
signifies
of         the impact
   production     of rawofmaterials,
                             production    of raw
                                       of the      materials,
                                               packaging   andofthe
                                                                  the  packaging
                                                                    waste           and The
                                                                            handling.     the impact
                                                                                               waste handling.
                                                                                                       shown inThe the
impact   shown     in the  figure  is the impact   of producing    packaging   and
figure is the impact of producing packaging and raw materials connected to bread wasteraw   materials  connected    to
                                                                                                           as well as
bread   waste    as well   as waste   treatment   for this packaging.    In this  figure,   the indirect
waste treatment for this packaging. In this figure, the indirect and direct impacts of bread waste are    and   direct
impacts of
included    inbread   wastewhere
               the section    are included   in the
                                     the waste      section
                                                occurs.     where
                                                        Retail       the waste
                                                               wastage           occurs.
                                                                          impacts,         Retail wastage
                                                                                     for example,           impacts,
                                                                                                     are included   in
for example,     are included    in the retail section. However,    influences   across   life cycle stages,
the retail section. However, influences across life cycle stages, such as the effect of consumer behaviour   such as
theretail
on   effectbread
            of consumer     behaviour
                   waste, are  not shown.on retail bread waste, are not shown.




                         Figure 5. Distribution of GHG emissions for different life cycle factors.
                         Figure 5. Distribution of GHG emissions for different life cycle factors.
5.3. Product Wastage and Packaging
5.3. Product Wastage and Packaging
       The impact of bread waste comprises not only waste transport and waste handling but also the
       The impact
production            of bread waste
               of ingredients,           comprises
                                  the baking   of thenot   onlydistribution
                                                       bread,    waste transport    and
                                                                               and all    waste
                                                                                        other     handling
                                                                                               impacts       but alsowith
                                                                                                         associated     the
productionnew
producing      of ingredients,     the baking
                     loaves to replace     the of the bread,
                                                wasted   bread.distribution
                                                                  In Figure 5, and  alleffects
                                                                                  the   other impacts
                                                                                               of productassociated
                                                                                                            wastagewithare
producing     new    loaves   to  replace  the  wasted   bread.   In  Figure   5, the  effects
visualised, with the exception of those at the ingredient production stage where data was not  of product   wastage     are
                                                                                                                 available.
visualised,
It             with
   is clear from   thethe   exception
                        figure   that theofimpact
                                             those of
                                                    at product
                                                        the ingredient
                                                                 wastageproduction
                                                                             gave rise tostage    where data
                                                                                           a significant          was not
                                                                                                           proportion    of
available.   It is clear   from    the figure  that the   impact    of  product   wastage    gave
the total GHG emissions at the consumer and retail stages. When comparing the total impacts in the rise  to a  significant
proportion
different      of the total
            categories,   we GHG
                              see thatemissions
                                        the shareatwas
                                                    the also
                                                         consumer      and retail
                                                              significant:   15.3%stages.
                                                                                    of totalWhen
                                                                                             GHGcomparing         the total
                                                                                                    emissions, 10.7%     of
impacts in the different
eutrophication,                 categories, we
                    11.9% of acidification,       see of
                                               16.6%   that
                                                         ADP thefossil
                                                                 share(abiotic
                                                                          was also   significant:
                                                                                 depletion         15.3%
                                                                                            potential,     of total
                                                                                                        fossil       GHG
                                                                                                               resources),
emissions,
19.4%         10.7%
         of water      of eutrophication,
                   usage    and 16.4% of CED   11.9%   of acidification,
                                                  (cumulative               16.6% of ADP fossil (abiotic depletion
                                                                  energy demand).
potential,   fossil resources),     19.4%  of water  usage   and   16.4%   of CED (cumulative energy demand).
       It can be observed from Figures 1–4 that consumer packaging and waste handling made a
       It can be observed from Figures 1–4 that consumer packaging and waste handling made a
relative low contribution compared with the other impact categories. For GHG emissions, the relative
relative   low contribution compared with the other impact categories. For GHG emissions, the relative
contribution was higher but still low in comparison with the other impacts. The whole packaging
contribution was higher but still low in comparison with the other impacts. The whole packaging
system was calculated here to include the total impacts from the production and waste handling of
system was calculated here to include the total impacts from the production and waste handling of
consumer, distribution and transport packaging. The impacts of this system when compared with the
consumer, distribution and transport packaging. The impacts of this system when compared with
total impacts were 7.5% of total GHG emissions, 3.3% of acidification, 1.5% of eutrophication, 2.1% of
the total impacts were 7.5% of total GHG emissions, 3.3% of acidification, 1.5% of eutrophication,
water use, 11.6% of ADP fossil and 13.0% of CED. The impact of the packaging can thus be seen to be
2.1% of water use, 11.6% of ADP fossil and 13.0% of CED. The impact of the packaging can thus be
well below that of the bread waste.
seen to be well below that of the bread waste.
       The effect of product wastage is mitigated by the utilisation of bread waste from both bakery and
       The effect of product wastage is mitigated by the utilisation of bread waste from both bakery
retail as animal feed. The GHG emissions of 1 kg of bread used for feed was −0.26 kg CO2 -eq/kg of
and retail as animal feed. The GHG emissions of 1 kg of bread used for feed was −0.26 kg CO2-eq/kg
bread wasted, which decreased the GHG emissions of 1 kg of bakery bread waste by 37% and that of
of bread wasted, which decreased the GHG emissions of 1 kg of bakery bread waste by 37% and that
retail bread waste by 33%. However, the treatment of consumer waste in municipal waste treatment
of retail bread waste by 33%. However, the treatment of consumer waste in municipal waste
was less beneficial, giving a net impact of 0.04 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread.
treatment was less beneficial, giving a net impact of 0.04 kg CO2-eq/kg of bread.

5.4. Impact of Processes That Can Extend the Life of Bread
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                        13 of 20



5.4. Impact of Processes That Can Extend the Life of Bread
     Several processes or products have the potential to extend the life of bread. The most obvious
example is the packaging, which protects the product from drying out as well as from microbial
contamination and other degrading factors. Consumers also employ strategies to preserve the freshness
of the bread. These include frozen storage, toasting or changing the packaging. Our analysis showed
that the impact of the consumer’s use of extra packaging was low at only 2.8% of the total GHG
emissions. The impact of freezing and toasting was even lower at only 0.6%. In the case of CED,
the share of total consumption was higher at 1.8% and 2.9%, respectively. These calculations were
made using specific figures on consumer behaviour, which showed that almost 100% of consumers use
an extra bag, whereas only 43% use freeze storage and 31% toast the bread.

5.5. Potential Measures for Reducing the Environmental Impact of Bread
      A number of possibilities exist for reducing the environmental impact of bread, and some have
already been exploited. One example is the utilisation of wasted bread from retail and bakeries as
feed for pigs. Most consumer bread waste is sent for biological treatment or incineration. Very little
household waste is sent to landfill in Norway, and this prevents significant emissions.
      Looking at the results, several measures can be identified that offer a theoretical potential for
reducing the environmental impact of bread. A 50% reduction in production waste would reduce
GHG emissions by 0.9%, and reducing retail waste to 10% would give a 0,8% reduction. Completely
eliminating retail waste would, however, reduce GHG emissions by 6.3%. If consumer waste was
halved, that would create a 4% reduction in GHG emissions, whereas the elimination of such waste
would result in 8% lower overall GHG emissions.
      It is clear that measures targeting bread waste could have a major impact. One possibility is
to further increase the amount of bread that is frozen and/or toasted. This would probably lead
to a reduction in bread waste, but the total impact is difficult to calculate without further studies.
The negative impact from such a measure is low, even if all bread is stored frozen and toasted before
use, the consequence would be an increase in GHG emissions of 1,7 %, thus only a slight increase
      If the original packaging is so good that consumers feel no need to choose to use an extra bag, the
reduction in total GHG emissions would be 2.8%.
      Alternative packaging solutions have been tested within the Breadpack project [29], of which
this study forms a part. The first test, which was on a consumer packaging similar to that in existing
use but with a different composition of cellulose fibres, showed that the bread remained fresh for
an additional day (measured in crust firmness). This indicates that a change of packaging material could
be an important measure in the prevention of food waste. A consumer test with a perforated paper bag
coated on the inside with 5% PE showed that the bread was perceived by consumers as staying fresh
for as long as four days after production. These tests ought to be carried out on a larger scale and in
the actual value chain before any conclusions can be drawn. There is, however, a strong indication that
environmental impact could be reduced as the bread would stay fresh for longer, and the consumer
would be more likely to consume the entire loaf. The negative environmental impact of producing the
bag and its raw materials is virtually identical, hence the overall substitution of the original packaging
with either of the two tested packaging would probably be positive. Another possibility is to offer
smaller-sized loaves. Such products have already been introduced into the Norwegian market, but it is
still difficult to show their effect on bread waste.

6. Discussion

6.1. Total Impacts
     The GHG emissions result in our study was 7% higher than a previous study [13] for Norwegian
bread. Results for other impact categories could not be compared with that study because it is
not clear which version of ReCiPe was used in that study. Comparison of aquatic eutrophication
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                         14 of 20



with those found by Kulak et al [10] showed that the results were in the lower end in this study:
0.005 kg N-eq compared to 0.003–0.06 kg N-eq and 0.00021 kg P-eq compared to 0.00018–0.0016 kg
P-eq. Other comparisons were difficult to make because the other published studies calculated GHG
emissions only or used obsolete LCIA methods or LCIA methods that were unavailable in our software.
By publishing results in several different LCIA methods, we hope to increase comparability in future
bread studies.
      The previous Norwegian study [13] did not take product wastage into account, so a lower GHG
emissions result was to be expected. However, that study found very high CO2 emissions from changes
in SOC, whereas this study did not include that effect.
      The reason that SOC was not included was partly because there is no internationally accepted
methodology for calculating SOC changes in LCAs. The other justification is that the methodology used
in Reference [13] was based on measurements made between the 1950s and 2001 [30], and it is not clear
if these changes could be extrapolated and applied in 2018 or if a new steady state has been achieved.
It is also not clear whether current users of the soil should be allocated emissions from a change in
management practices and crop rotations that occurred 60 or 70 years ago. Another study [31] used
a different methodology and had also found very different results, albeit in another geographical area.
A sensitivity analysis was performed adding the SOC impacts (0.14 kg CO2 -eq/kg wheat) found by
Bonesmo et al. [32] for all Norwegian wheat used in the bread but not the imported wheat. The effect
was an increase of 0.06 kg CO2 -eq/kg of bread, i.e., +6%. This is a significant increase. If the SOC
effect had been calculated for all 21 ingredients, it is possible that the increase might have been much
higher. In future, more research ought to be carried out on the impact of SOC changes in the cultivation
of cereals.
      These two factors (SOC change and bread waste) have contrasting effects, which could explain
the close similarity in the GHG emissions results. In the other impact categories, there was no clear
pattern. Some results were lower, while others were higher. One difference in methodology could
explain part of the variance. Korsaeth et al. [13] used input–output methodology to calculate the
impact of buildings, whereas regular LCA modelling was used in this study based on the simplified
farm infrastructure included in the Agri-Footprint database. This gave a much lower impact of
infrastructure for all impact categories in this study than in the Korsaeth et al. study [13]. For example,
the impact of infrastructure on the toxicity indicators was high, thus partly explaining the difference
in toxicity impacts. In addition, the infrastructure impact of GHG emissions was much higher in the
Korsaeth et al. [13] study.
      In comparison with the studies by Notarnicola et al., Kulak et al. and Espinoza-Oriaz et al. [10–12],
the GHG emission result of the present study was at the lower end, although it was far higher than for
the Danish rye bread [14]. In the case of Notarnicola et al. [11], this can be explained by the fact that
the national bread types investigated in that study were for many countries. Rather than the staple,
everyday bread, they were bread for special occasions. Many of these bread types contain significant
quantities of ingredients of animal origin, thus explaining the high GHG emissions. In the study of
bread from cereals produced using low input agriculture, the difference in GHG emissions can largely
be explained by the much lower yield of such systems compared with the conventional agricultural
systems supplying grains used in the bread in our study.
      The reference systems used Kulak et al. [10] gave results at the same level as our study.
      The carbon footprint study [12] produced significantly higher results than this study. The main
difference was the impact of the consumption stage as a result of the refrigeration and toasting of
the bread. This was because the UK electricity used in Espinoza-Oriaz et al. [12] is 71–76% of fossil
origin. The actual consumption of electricity was higher in that study than the study here for storage
(0.047 vs. 0.17 kWh) but lower for toasting (0.059 vs. 0.078). Nevertheless, even using the higher
number for storage in this study would have a very low impact on the total GHG emissions.
      The Danish study of rye bread [14] gave a GHG emissions result of 0.731, but it included an
effect of the waste management of wasted bread (29% wasted in Denmark) of 325 g CO2 -eq/kg of
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                          15 of 20



bread. This provided a major benefit when compared with the total GHG emissions. In this study,
the net benefit of the wasted bread (21.3% wasted in Norway) was calculated as being just 33 g
CO2 -eq/kg of bread. In Norway, the waste management of bread from households gave a net negative
impact of 4.5 g CO2 -eq, which is in stark contrast to the huge positive impact of incinerated bread in
Denmark. The reason for this is probably that the Danish energy system is dominated by fossil fuels,
whereas electricity and district heating in Norway are largely produced from renewable sources.

6.2. Hotspots
      The primary hotspot for all impact categories was the production of ingredients, or in other
words, agricultural production. The production and processing of wheat gave rise to a majority of
ingredient emissions, for example, 83% (0.50 kg CO2 -eq per kg of bread) of total GHG emissions.
Of the total wheat-related GHG emissions, 37% (or 31% of total ingredient GHG emissions) came from
wet-processed wheat. This wheat is not produced in Norway. In case of wheat produced in Norway,
the main hotspots (as a percentage of GHG emissions) were N2 O emissions (38%), fertiliser production
(25%) and fuel combustion and production (19%).
      This is the same finding as in many other studies [11–14]. The bakery GHG emissions,
however, was found to be relatively small compared with the findings by Notarnicola et al. and
Espinoza-Oriaz et al. [11,12]. Refrigerated storage and toasting also contributed little, in contrast with
the findings by Espinoza-Oriaz et al. [12].
      The energy used in the baking, refrigeration and toasting was electricity. Emissions from
electricity generation in the national grid mix was relatively low, whereas this was a hotspot for
Notarnicola et al. [11]. This can in part be explained by the fact that the Norwegian electricity grid
mix is dominated by hydroelectricity, which produces very low emissions in comparison with other
electricity sources. Thus, baking, refrigeration and toasting had few consequences for the overall
environmental impacts.
      In this study, product wastage played a major role in the environmental impact, which was only
found by Espinoza-Oriaz et al. [12].
      Kulak et al. [10] found different hotspots for the various indicators and food networks. For some
types of impacts, agriculture was most important, whereas transport or baking had the most
significance for other impacts. This was not the case in this study, where the manufacture of ingredients
dominated in all the impact categories.

6.3. Environmental and Economic Impacts of Product Wastage and Packaging
      Packaging preserves products and limits product wastage. The results showed that the
environmental impact of the packaging was significantly less than the impact of the bread waste.
The GHG emissions of the packaging was approximately 7.5% of the total, whereas the GHG emissions
of the product waste was 15.3% of the total. In another study [17], the economic cost of the packaging
was found to be less than 10% of the cost of the food waste. These results contradict popular opinion
among consumers that packaging is more of a problem than food waste [18]. Raising consumer
awareness by communicating these findings could reduce bread wastage. Another implication of the
fact that bread waste creates greater impacts is that an increase in the impact of the packaging could be
justified if it led to lower product wastage.
      The fact that bread is wasted at a certain life cycle stage does not imply that the bakery, retail shop
or consumers are responsible for all the wastage that occurs at their respective stages. There can
be factors in other parts of the value chain that contribute to this wastage. Consumers in Norway,
for example, expect their favourite bread to be available at any time of day. The consequence of this
is that retail shops overstock bread to ensure that all their bread products are available, even just
before closing time. This results in an increase in retail waste, but the explanation lies in consumer
expectations and preferences.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                        16 of 20



6.4. Potential Measures to Reduce Environmental Impact
      Several possible measures exist with the potential to reduce environmental impact in the
production of ingredients. At the agricultural stage, increasing yields while maintaining inputs
at the same level offers significant potential. Uhlen et al. [33] reviewed several possible agronomic
measures that would reduce impacts, while Korsaeth et al. mentioned measures such as precision
fertilisation and pest control [13]. Infrastructure impacts could be reduced if farm equipment is used
over a more extensive area (ibid). Another promising reduction potential lies in the use of crop
rotation for legumes and oil crops [34]. This improves soil structure, increases yields and reduces
the incidence of plant disease compared with the cereal monoculture systems that is now commonly
applied in Norway.
      It is difficult to assess the actual effect of measures to prevent bread waste without carrying out
tests in the market, but it would be reasonable to expect that frozen storage and toasting of bread would
extend the shelf life of bread and thus reduce bread waste. The negative impact of toasting and frozen
storage in this study was low (0.6% of GHG emissions), but the basis for calculation was uncertain.
The impact of freezing was determined using old database data for storage and a theoretical calculation
for the freezing using water as a proxy for bread. The impact of toasting was calculated using old
figures from the UK [12] in the absence of newer data for Norway. The authors’ own experiments
suggest a much lower energy consumption per slice of bread, but in order to obtain a correct picture,
consumer behaviour would have to be taken into account. Overall, the impact of toasting and frozen
storage is shown in this study to be so low that the uncertainty in the area of electricity consumption
has little effect.
      In the Breadpack project, which this study formed a part of, one important aim was to reduce
bread waste by developing a packaging that was more effective in preserving freshness. This would
make consumers more willing to eat bread for a longer period after it was baked and would thus
reduce bread waste.
      The current packaging is not optimal for maintaining product freshness and thus limiting bread
waste. New tests [29] on a packaging with a composition of cellulose fibres that differs from previous
packaging has shown that the bread will keep fresh for an additional day (measured in crust firmness).
This would indicate that a change of packaging material could be an important measure in the
prevention of food waste. Further tests with a perforated paper bag coated with 5% PE on the inside
showed it kept the bread fresh for as long as four days after production. This would help consumers
to consume all the bread that they have bought.
      One of the most avoidable environmental impacts is, in all likelihood, that caused by product
wastage. However, judging from the authors’ interviews with market players, it could be difficult
to achieve a major reduction in bread waste. One reason for this is consumer behaviour and
expectations. Norwegian consumers are generally unwilling to eat bread that is more than two
days old. Another important factor also has to do with consumer behaviour. Consumers expect their
favourite bread to be available in shops all day, even just before closing time. Because of fluctuations
in sales, this means that stores always overstock and order more bread than they expect to sell.
Thus, the elimination of bread waste becomes an unrealistic goal unless consumer expectations change.
Retail shops do, in general, have take-back agreements with the bakeries. This means that the shop
does not have to pay for unsold bread and that bakeries collect this bread at no cost to the shop.
As shown in a previous study [35], this provides little incentive for the retail shops to reduce waste and
may be an important contributor to retail bread waste. In many cases, however, it is the bakeries that
have control; they know the stock levels (in real time) in many of the shops through their automated
till systems and are therefore able to decide how much bread (and which type) should be re-stocked.
      Despite the abovementioned difficulties, it is probable that bread waste levels will decrease
because the motivation to achieve such a reduction is currently high. The food industry has signed
a voluntary agreement with the Norwegian Government and other interested parties that has as
a target of 50% reduction in food waste by 2030.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                   17 of 20



      Another means of reducing the environmental impact of bread would be by increasing the
efficiency of waste treatment. This could be achieved by utilising the bread as a source for biogas
production. The environmental benefit of such treatment would strongly depend on how the produced
biogas (for example, for fuel), and residual matter (for example, for fertiliser) were used and what they
replaced [36].

7. Conclusions
     The environmental impact of bread, per kg produced and consumed in Norway was as follows:
global warming potential of 0.99 kg CO2 -eq, eutrophication potential of 7.2 g PO4 -eq, acidification
potential of 8.4 g SO2 -eq and cumulative energy demand of 18 MJ. The impacts are at the same level,
or lower, in comparison with other studies of bread, even though the wastage of bread in Norway is
high and the climate is cold, giving lower grain yields than further south in Europe.
     The primary hotspot for bread in Norway is the production of bread ingredients, followed by
product wastage. The reduction of bread waste has a high potential in the reduction of bread-related
environmental impacts. Changing the consumer packaging to a specific new variety, which was tested
within this project, has a major potential for lessening environmental impacts through the reduction
of bread waste. The environmental impacts of the packaging system are low, and the results of this
change in consumer packaging would be negligible. Consumer behaviour affects bread wastage rates
negatively because of a reluctance to eat bread that is not completely fresh and an expectation of finding
one’s chosen product on the shop shelves at any time of day. Consumers do, however, also employ
strategies for keeping the bread fresh and thus reducing waste. They include extra packaging,
freeze storage and toasting. These strategies have fewer consequences for environmental impact but
a positive impact on bread consumption. In addition, the preference in Norway for wholegrain-based
bread gives a relatively lower impact than in countries where white bread is most popular.

Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.O. and O.J.H.; Data curation, S.O.; Formal analysis, E.S.;
Investigation, E.S. and S.O.; Methodology, E.S.; Project administration, O.J.H.; Supervision, O.J.H.; Validation, S.O.
and O.J.H.; Writing—original draft, E.S., S.O. and O.J.H.
Funding: This research was funded by Norges Forskningsråd (225211/E40).
Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank their colleagues from PFI, Nofima, Ostfold Research,
Stenqvist AS, Billerud Korsnäs AB and NTNU for providing insight and expertise that greatly assisted the research.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Appendix A.


                                      Table A1. Results using other LCIA methods.

                              ILCD Method
                         Impact Category                         Unit                       Result
                        Climate Change                         Kg CO2 -eq                 8.8 × 10−1
                        Ozone depletion                       kg CFC-11 eq                6.7 × 10−5
               Human toxicity, non-cancer effects                 CTUh                    2.0 × 10−6
                 Human toxicity, cancer effects                   CTUh                    3.8 × 10−8
                       Particulate matter                     kg PM2.5 eq                 6.0 × 10−1
                     Ionizing radiation HH                    kBq U235 eq                 6.4 × 10−2
                 Ionizing radiation E (interim)                   CTUe                    3.5 × 10−7
                Photochemical ozone formation                kg NMVOC eq                   2.9 × 100
                          Acidification                        molc H+ eq                 1.4 × 10−2
                   Terrestrial eutrophication                  molc N eq                  6.0 × 10−2
                   Freshwater eutrophication                     kg P eq                  2.9 × 10−1
                     Marine eutrophication                       kg N eq                   1.1 × 101
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                        18 of 20



                                                   Table A1. Cont.

                    Freshwater ecotoxicity                        CTUe                         1.8 × 101
                           Land use                            kg C deficit                    1.9 × 101
                  Water resource depletion                     m3 water eq                    3.6 × 10−3
          Mineral, fossil and re n resource depletion           kg Sb eq                      3.1 × 10−2
                          ReCiPe Method
                      Global Warming                            kg CO2 -eq                     1.0 × 100
               Stratospheric ozone depletion                   kg CFC11 eq                    9.7 ×10−6
                     Ionizing radiation                        kBq Co-60 eq                    4.2 × 101
              Ozone formation, Human health                    kg NO × eq                      2.1 × 100
             Fine particulate matter formation                 kg PM2.5 eq                     1.7 × 100
           Ozone formation, Terrestrial ecosystems              kg NOx eq                      2.2 × 100
                   Terrestrial acidification                     kg SO2 eq                     9.2 × 100
                 Freshwater eutrophication                        kg P eq                     2.8 × 10−1
                   Marine eutrophication                          kg N eq                     2.9 × 10−3
                    Terrestrial ecotoxicity                     kg 1.4-DCB                     3.0 × 100
                   Freshwater ecotoxicity                       kg 1.4-DCB                    3.3 × 10−2
                     Marine ecotoxicity                         kg 1.4-DCB                    4.2 × 10−2
               Human carcinogenic toxicity                      kg 1.4-DCB                    1.6 × 10−2
                           Land use                            m2a crop eq                     1.7 × 100
                  Mineral resource scarcity                      kg Cu eq                     1.7 × 10−3
                   Fossil resource scarcity                       kg oil eq                   2.3 × 10−1


Appendix B.


                Table A2. Overview of secondary data used in the study (most important processes).

     Process or Material        Database                                 Database Process
            Wheat             Agrifootprint   Wheat grain, dried, at farm/PL Economic
                                              Wheat grain, dried, at farm/NO Economic
               Rye            AgriFootprint   Rye grain, dried, at farm, NO economic
             Barley           AgriFootprint   Barley grain, dried, at farm/SE Economic
         Wheat gluten         AgriFootprint   Wheat gluten meal, from wet milling, at plant/DE Economic
      Water as Ingredient      Ecoinvent      Tap water {Europe without Switzerland}| market for | Cut-off, U
               Salt            Ecoinvent      Sodium chloride, powder {RER}| production | Cut-off, U
              Yeast            Ecoinvent      Yeast paste, from whey, at fermentation/CH U
        Sunflower seed         Ecoinvent      Sunflower seed {FR}| sunflower production | Cut-off, U
          Sesame seed          Ecoinvent      Sunflower seed {FR}| sunflower production | Cut-off, U (as proxy)
            Linseed            Ecoinvent      Linseed {RoW}| linseed production | Cut-off, U
           Electricity         Ecoinvent      Electricity, low voltage {NO}| market for | Cut-off, U
        Road transport                        Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 {RER}|
                               Ecoinvent
      (Transport to retail)                   Transport, freight, lorry 16-32 metric ton, EURO5 | Cut-off, U
     Road transport (other                    Transport, freight, lorry >32 metric ton, EURO5 {GLO}| market for |
                               Ecoinvent
           transport)                         Cut-off, U
                                              Polyethylene terephthalate, granulate, amorphous {RER}| production |
                                              Cut-off, U
     Consumer packaging        Ecoinvent
                                              Kraft paper, bleached {RER}| production | Cut-off, U
                                              Extrusion, plastic film {GLO}| market for | Cut-off, U
       Consumer extra
                               Ecoinvent      Packaging film, low density polyethylene {GLO} | market for | Cut-off, U
         packaging
                                              Transport, passenger car, small size, diesel, EURO 5 {RER}| transport,
     Consumer transport        Ecoinvent
                                              passenger car, small size, diesel, EURO 5 | Cut-off, U


References
1.    Tukker, A.; Huppes, G.; Guinée, J.; Heijungs, R.; de Koning, A.; van Oers, L.; Suh, S.; Geerken, T.;
      Van Holderbeke, M.; Jansen, B.; et al. Environmental Impact of Products (EIPRO), Analysis of the Life Cycle
      Environmental Impacts Related to the Final Consumption of the EU-25; Technical Report EUR 22284 EN; European
      Union: Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2005.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                    19 of 20



2.    Monforti-Ferrario, F.; Dallemand, J.-F.; Pinedo, I.; Pascua, V.; Motola, M.; Banja, M.; Scarlat, N.; Medarac, H.
      Energy Use in the EU Food Sector: State of Play and Opportunities for Improvement; JRC Science and Policy Report,
      EUR 27247 EN; European Union: Maastricht, The Netherlands, 2015.
3.    Statistics Norway Data on Population. Available online: https://www.ssb.no/en/befolkning/nokkeltall/
      population (accessed on 13 August 2018).
4.    Holm Totland, T.; Kjerpeseth Melnaes, B.; Lundberg-Hallèn, N.; Helland-Kigen, K.M.; Lund-Blix, N.A.;
      Borch Myhre, J.; Wetting Johansen, A.M.; Bjoerge Loeken, E.; Frost Andersen, L. Norkost 3. En landsomfattende
      kostholdsundersøkelse blant menn og kvinner i Norge i alderen 18-70 år, 2010-11; The Norwegian Directorate of
      Health: Oslo, Norway, 2012. (In Norwegian)
5.    AC Nielsen. Brødrapport, August 2018; AC Nielsen: Oslo, Norway, 2018. (In Norwegian)
6.    The Norwegian Directorate of Health. Anbefalinger Om Kosthold, ErnæRing Og Fysisk Aktivitet; Report IS-2170;
      The Norwegian Directorate of Health: Skøyen, Oslo, Norway, 2014. (In Norwegian)
7.    Norwegian Food Composition Database. Norwegian Food Safety Authority, 2018. Available online: www.
      matvaretabellen.no (accessed on 9 September 2018).
8.    The Norwegian Information Office for Bread and Cereals. Available online: https://brodogkorn.no/
      (accessed on 10 September 2018).
9.    Stensgaard, A.; Hanssen, O.J. Food waste in Norway 2010–2015 Final Report from the ForMat-Project; OR 17.16;
      Ostfold Research: Kråkerøy, Norway, 2016.
10.   Kulak, M.; Nemecek, T.; Frossard, E.; Chable, V.; Gaillard, G. Life cycle assessment of bread from several
      alternative food networks in Europe. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 90, 104–113. [CrossRef]
11.   Notarnicola, B.; Tassielli, G.; Renzulli, P.A.; Monforti, F. Energy Flows and Greenhouses Gases of EU
      (European Union) National Breads Using an LCA (Life Cycle Assessment) Approach. J. Clean. Prod.
      2017, 140, 455–469. [CrossRef]
12.   Espinoza-Oriaz, N.; Stichnothe, H.; Azapagic, A. The carbon footprint of bread. Int. J. Life Cycle Assess.
      2011, 16, 351–365. [CrossRef]
13.   Korsaeth, A.; Jakobsen, A.Z.; Roer, A.G.; Henriksen, T.M.; Sonesson, U.; Bonesmo, H.; Skjelvaag, A.O.;
      Strømman, A.H. Environmental life cycle assessment of cereal and bread production in Norway. Acta Agric.
      Scand. Sect. A 2013. [CrossRef]
14.   Jensen, J.K.; Arlbjoern, J.S. Product carbon footprint of rye bread. J. Clean. Prod. 2014, 45–47. [CrossRef]
15.   Oestergaard, S.; Hanssen, O.J. Wasting of Fresh-Packed Bread by Consumers—Influence of Shopping
      Behaviour, Storing, Handling, and Consumer Preferences. Sustainability 2018, 9, 2251. [CrossRef]
16.   Williams, H.; Wickstrøm, F. Environmental impact of packaging and food losses in a life cycle perspective:
      A comparative analysis of five food items. J. Clean. Prod. 2011, 19, 43–48. [CrossRef]
17.   Hanssen, O.J.; Oestergaard, S.; Svanes, E. Food waste prevention through improved packaging and
      distribution in the fresh bakery sector. In Proceedings of the 27th IAPRI Symposium on Packaging, Valencia,
      Spain, 8–11 June 2015.
18.   News Article about Consumers Attitudes. Available online: https://www.grontpunkt.no/nyhet/nesten-9-
      av-10-tar-feil-om-matavfall/ (accessed on 16 November 2018). (In Norwegian)
19.   Hanssen, O.J.; Møller, H.; Svanes, E.; Schakenda, V. Life Cycle Assessment as a tool in food waste reduction
      and packaging optimization—Packaging innovation and optimization in a life cycle perspective. In Life Cycle
      Assessment; Curran, M.A., Ed.; Chapter 16; Schrivener Publishing: Beverly, MA, USA, 2012.
20.   Thyberg, K.L.; Tonjes, D.J. Drivers of food waste and their implications for sustainable policy development.
      Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2016, 106, 110–123. [CrossRef]
21.   Hebrok, M.; Boks, C. Household food waste: Drivers and potential intervention points for design—An
      extensive review. J. Clean. Prod. 2017, 151, 380–392. [CrossRef]
22.   Quested, T.E.; Marsh, E.; Stunell, D.; Parry, A.D. Spaghetti Soup: The Complex World of Food Waste
      Behaviours. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2013, 79, 43–51. [CrossRef]
23.   International Organization for Standardization (ISO). ISO 14040:2006. Environmental Management—Life
      Cycle Assessment—Principles and Framework. ISO 14044:2006. Environmental Management—Life Cycle
      Assessment—Requirements and Guidelines; International Organization for Standards: Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
24.   Baumann, H.; Tillman, A.-M. The Hitch Hiker’s Guide to LCA: AN Orientation in Life Cycle Assessment
      Methodology and Application; Studentlitteratur AB: Lund, Sweden, 2014.
Sustainability 2019, 11, 43                                                                                      20 of 20



25.   Curran, M.-A. Life Cycle Assessment Handbook: A Guide for Environmentally Sustainable Products;
      Wiley-Schrivener: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2012.
26.   Pretty, J.N.; Ball, A.S.; Lang, T.; Morison, J.I.L. Farm costs and food miles: An assessment of the full cost of
      the UK weekly food basket. Food Policy 2005, 30, 1–19. [CrossRef]
27.   Government Statistics on Waste Treatment. Available online: http://www.environment.no/ (accessed on
      25 May 2018).
28.   Raadal, H.L.; Modahl, I.S.; Lyng, K.-L. Klimaregnskap for avfallshåndtering, Fase I og II; Report OR 18.09; Ostfold
      Research: Kråkerøy, Norway, 2009. (In Norwegian)
29.   Oestergaard, S. The Role of Consumer Behaviour towards Reducing Waste of Fresh Bread: Sustainable
      Packaging Development in an Industrial Perspective. PhD Thesis, NTNU Norwegian University of Science
      and Technology, Trondheim, Norway, 2018.
30.   Riley, H.; Bakkegard, B. Declines of soil organic matter under arable cropping in southeast Norway. Acta Agric.
      Scand. Sect. B 2006, 56, 217–233. [CrossRef]
31.   Petersen, B.M.; Trydeman Knudsen, M.; Hermansen, J.; Halberg, N. An approach to include soil carbon
      changes in life cycle assessments. J. Clean. Prod. 2013, 52, 217–224. [CrossRef]
32.   Bonesmo, H.; Skjelvåg, A.O.; Janzen, H.H.; Klakegg, O.; Tveito, O.E. Greenhouse gas emission intensities
      and economic efficiency in crop production: A systems analysis of 95 farms. Agric. Syst. 2012, 110, 142–151.
      [CrossRef]
33.   Uhlen, A.K.; Børresen, T.; Kværnø, S.; Krogstad, T.; Waalen, W.; Strand, E.; Bleken, M.A.; Seehusen, T.;
      Deelstra, J.; Sundgren, T.; et al. Økt norsk kornproduksjon gjennom forbedret agronomisk praksis. En vurdering av
      agronomiske tiltak som kan bidra til avlingsøkninger i kornproduksjonen; NIBIO report; NIBIO: Oslo, Norway,
      2017; Volume 3, nr 87. (In Norwegian)
34.   Abrahamsen, U.; Brodal, G. Virkning av ulike forgrøder på neste års avling av hvete; NIBIO book; NIBIO: Oslo,
      Norway, 2016. (In Norwegian)
35.   Eriksson, M.; Ghosh, R.; Mattsson, L.; Ismatov, A. Takeback agreements in the perspective of food waste
      generation at the supplier-retailer interface. Resour. Conserv. Recycl. 2017, 122, 83–93. [CrossRef]
36.   Lyng, K.-A. Reduction of Environmental Impacts through Optimisation of Biogas Value Chains. Drivers,
      Barriers and Policy Development. Ph.D. Thesis, Norwegian University of Life Sciences, Aas, Norway, 2018.

                              © 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
                              article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
                              (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
